---
title: Lord Kelvin display at Glasgow University
longertitle: I am never content until I have constructed a mechanical model of the subject I am studying. If I succeed in making one, I understand. Otherwise, I do not.
author: Takayuki Muranushi
---

tl;dr: William Thomson 1st Baron Kelvin of Largs is a revolutionary scientist.

kelvins-models.JPG

I visited Glasgow University in pilgrimage to the birth-place of Glasgow Haskell Compiler.
Wim Vanderbauwhede gave me guide to Glasgow University. He also
recommended me to Lord Kelvin's display at Hunterian Museum built into
G.U.  In front of this shelf I quivered and almost cried.

At first glance, I had no guess what are these gadgets and widgets are designed for.

eth2.JPG

eth1.JPG

eth0.JPG

**Aether**. I was shockingly reminded that the term *aether*, in my
dictionary fall into the same category as *homunculus* and
*philosopher's stone*, once belonged to a fundamental hypothesis of
physics, and was subject of serious study. I was also shocked to find
out the way William studied aether. Instead of manipulating equations,
he cut and bent wires, welded them together, tied the model to strings
and spring scales to measure its response to external force. Perhaps
he took this model in his hand and shook it in his hand to get some
instinction.

I went to the right and found something impressed me even more.

ether-0.JPG

ether-1.JPG

ether-2.JPG

This ugly pile of mud is quite different to beauty and simplicity of
the equations of electromagnetism. Yet, this is William's way of
tackling the question.

The aether needed to be very rigid for fast motions, while at the same
time not impede slow motions (of e.g. the Earth).  This cobbler's wax is a material that
behaves as solid for fast motion (it will shatter when hit with a
hammer) but as liquid for slow motion (it will slowly flow down the
glacier.)  I was furter impressed when I recognized a nozzle crafted
at the midpoint of the ladders. I can read William's intention of
studying the equations of motion of the matter.

The equations of motion of aether as viscoelastic mechanical continuum
born out of mud, was later distrilled by Maxwell and then by Heaviside
to the form we know today. One of the fundamental laws of physics.

Making models
=============



In sympathy, I recalled my experience in undergraduate
school. Analytical mechanics is one of the first subject taught in
the university. We received lectures from one of the top quantum
physicist available, and we also studied Landau & Lifshitz by
ourselves. At those classes I firmly argued against principle of least
action, saying that it breaks causality principle and contradicts free
will, to think that the path of motion is determined from its starting
point and its end point.  If least action principle were correct, what
happens when one first determines the path, and then put his hand and
block the path (the MATRIX aborts with a failed assertion? Such
phenomena has never been observed!)

The teacher argued that the equation-of-motion model and the
least-action model are mathematically equivalent. We can deduce one
model from the other. In fact, the textbook proof is not hard for me
to reproduce. However, I was not convinced.  It is okay to apply math
on physical deduction and engineering designs. But believing that we
can mathematically rewrite fundamental laws of physics is no different
from believing in psychokinesis.  We cannot bend spoons just by
thinking so.  We cannot fly by mentally rewriting the law of gravity.
Consider how many kids, including myself, have been trying really hard
to do so. This is an experimentally disproved idea.

Still, I made approach from many directions to understand this idea.
In one page of my notebook there is a design drawing of a contraption
made of cardboard boxes, strings, pulleys and small weights, carefully
balanced to encode the Lagrangian integral, so that a central string
would approximate a parabola.

In retrospect, young me had many thing to learn. The laws of physics
are not given and fixed. They are human product, and subject to
change. And although elementary particle physicists tend to declare
that "the action principle is the foundation of everything," their
*theory of everything* also comes with terms and conditions.

I don't clearly understand why the cardboard box model helped me
undertand and accept the diversity in physics. But I hope the episode help you
understand my sympathy to
the following William Thomson's motto:

making-models.JPG


Well, aether was a theory that now went to extinction. But he also left
other models that are still alive today.

eth3.JPG

PV.JPG

I was happy to find that he (his brother in this case) knew the joy of
working with clay. They also knew the importance of materializing the
potential function to the form we can touch and study. To me the model
shines like an OOPArt, given that there was no CADs nor 3D printers at
that age.  I am not at liberty and quality to say, but if my lectures
of thermodynamics used not only partial differential operators but
also these models, it should have been much easier for me to
understand the meaning of mathematical arguments.




He introduced brand new scientific apparatus and led teaching by example and demonstration.
-----------------

I cannot help feeling that young me fitted more well to 19th century Glasgow University,
rather than 21st century Kyoto University classroom.

Teaching.JPG

Teaching-2.JPG


The life and soul of science is its practical application.
------------

industry.JPG

For this quote, I'd rather prefer the position of defending my friends
and myself in theoretical physics and pure science, from high demand of
practical application. The frontiers of science has drastically expanded
since the days of William's.

Still, if we believe the quote *his house was the first in the world
to have a complete electric lighting system*, William was an alpha
geek.



There is nothing new to be discovered in physics now. All that remains is more and precise measurement.
---------------------

precise-measurement.JPG

The attribution of this quote to William has been disputed. I have
heard of this quote in the annonymous context that an old professor
recommending one of his student not to become a physicist because
there's no future to the job. The student did not follow the advice
and later became one of the founders of the quantum mechanics.

In a sense the quote is honorably attributed to William Thomson, I
thought. He have invented many devices that contributed to precise
measurement.  It is him that led trans-Atlantic communication cable to
success.  He predictetd the attenuation effect of the seawater not
discovered by ground-based experiment and designed the right cable.
And his precise measurement technology made the fast-readout possible.

After this achievement William Thomson was elevated to Lord Kelvin.

I enjoyed a room-full of Lord Kelvin display, and eventually walked
back in front of my most favorite shelf thinking. William's love of
mechanical model brought him a success as both a physicist and an
inventor. Although, insisting on mechanical model also makes it
difficult to understand quantum mechanics. It is already cumbersome
to encode Lagrangian by strings and weights, aether by bedsprings.
Not to mention more sophisticated theories.

But wait. Today we have computers, which have vast unexplored
possibility of encoding models.  Recently I see the studies on
proof-assistants and automated proofs have been rapidly growing, both
in theory and in practice.  I suddenly realized the source of my love
to computer simulations. Computer simulations are not just a
compensate or substitute to laboratory experiments; we can also use it
to encode theoretical understanding. Furthermore, the understanding
encoded in machine readable forms are extremely easy to reproduce and
share, if e.g. put into github. There is little suffering from
confusion and miscalculation. It will be also easily patched when a
mistake is found.

I felt my mental barrier to criticisms desolve. It was actually a
barrier to understanding. Computer programs and scientific theories
shares common virture; they are best when they're shared, maintained,
updated, and patched. Features and the bug reports should be tested
for reproducivity, but in the same time IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT
WARRANTY OF ANY KIND. From time to time it may need completely
refactoring.

It is the way that leads to the truth of the life.

I silenly chanted the motto in its rephrased form.

*I am never content until I have constructed a mechanical model of the subject I am studying. If I succeed in making one, I understand. Otherwise, I do not.*





Conclusion
======

I'll conclude the article with a couple of my favorite quotes.


To live among friends is the primary essential of happiness.
------------------

collaboration.JPG

I hope to continue a student of the University as long as I live.
-------------------

Student.JPG


revolutionary-scientist.JPG
